---
layout: project
title: Wind Turbine Blade Design
description: Group CLass Project
technologies: [MATLAB, SolidWorks]
image: /assets/images/function-graph.png
---

Project Overview:
This project focused on the design, analysis, and experimental validation of a small-scale horizontal-axis wind turbine blade intended for wind-tunnel testing at a fixed rotational speed. The primary objective was to maximize the coefficient of power while satisfying strict geometric, operational, and structural constraints imposed by the laboratory setup. The blade was designed to operate at low Reynolds numbers and within safety limits on rotational speed, torque, and material stress, making it a realistic test case for applying aerodynamic theory to a constrained experimental system.

Design Process:
The blade geometry was developed using Blade Element Momentum (BEM) theory, combining actuator disk momentum relations with sectional airfoil aerodynamics to determine optimal chord and twist distributions along the span. A target tip-speed ratio of approximately 5 was selected to maximize power extraction, and the Selig 7075 airfoil was chosen due to its strong lift-to-drag performance at low Reynolds numbers. Key design assumptions included a constant angle of attack that maximized lift-to-drag ratio and a uniform Reynolds number of 50,000. Structural calculations were then performed to verify that bending stresses at the blade root remained below material limits under worst-case operating conditions.

Testing Summary
The blade geometry was developed using Blade Element Momentum (BEM) theory, combining actuator disk momentum relations with sectional airfoil aerodynamics to determine optimal chord and twist distributions along the span. A target tip-speed ratio of approximately 5 was selected to maximize power extraction, and the Selig 7075 airfoil was chosen due to its strong lift-to-drag performance at low Reynolds numbers. Key design assumptions included a constant angle of attack that maximized lift-to-drag ratio and a uniform Reynolds number of 50,000. Structural calculations were then performed to verify that bending stresses at the blade root remained below material limits under worst-case operating conditions.

Personal Contribution:
While I contributed to all aspects of the design project, I was specifically responsible for the data analysis, considerations, and conclusion. This also included the final project for the project EOS deliverable.


Figure 1: Optimized model of turbine blade on MATLAB.


Figure 2: CAD render of turbine hub geometry.


Figure 3: Power curves of 5 wind velicity integers 3-7m/s.
